---
title: Post #1
---
# Top 10 qualities of a software engineer

Its actually an uncomplete list of ten semi-technical commandments being a successful software engineer:

1. SEPARATION OF ROLES AND IDENTITIES ⚠️
	+ Don't use a privileged service for personal work, and without logging identities.
	+ Don't deter in overconfidence, noncompliance, and mistrust.
	- Support knowledge transfer, work procedures, and practice.
	- Mistakes happen, they will. Try to minimize them.

2. PRIVACY DRIVEN 🔐️
	+ Privacy is a measurement of trust. Drive it by proper authorization.
	+ Need private information? Just request a permission.
	+ Accidently release private information? First of all, tell the authority.
	- Go through standard procedures, they prevent ambiguities.
	- Really need software/hardware? Buy it. They might be worth it.

3. DATA MANIPULATION 📑️
	+ Inaccurate test result data may lead to severe damage. Eyes open, everytime.
	+ Do not misuse serious data in the name of processing and normalization.
	+ Handle data as per-se requirements and severities.
	- Rely on data "engineers/scientists/analysts" discreetly. Make sure data confidentiality, integrity, and authority.
	- Understand the basics of data; hypotheses, methodologies, automation, documentation, and tests.

4. HANDLING RESTRICTIONS 🚫️
	+ Restrictions and rules are there to protect you, directly or indirectly. You may not know the complete reasoning behind them.
	+ Need a license to software? Do not steal intellectual properties.
	+ Always go through reliable sources. Research open-source tools before use.
	- Backdoor solutions are not good for professional software.
	- Follow standard practices to licenses, patents, trademarks, Non-Disclosure Agreements (NDAs), copyrights and their infringements.

5. PRESENCE OVER REQUIREMENTS 👨‍💼️
	+ Put in your biggest hammer to the hardest stuff you need to break.
	+ Only sweat the hard stuff. Soft will crumble with common discretion then.
	+ The hardest choices require the strongest wills. For something good.

6. MONITORING AND LOGGING 🖋️
	+ Access management to professional tools and services.
	+ Can use automated logging and configuring tools for better management.
	+ Get back to source of the issue for proper managment.
	+ Monitoring must be in accordance to get to the cause and to filter the output.

7. CHANGE IS EVOLUTION 🚀️
	+ Make use of change management tools like version control, ticketing system, risk based assessments, semi-informal control, etc.
	+ Communication and transparency will lower the probability of disruption, if any. United we stand, divided...
	- No harm in consulting for a change, show-offs and rudeness are bad. Just test your stuff.
 	- Consistently learn new as per industry requirements.

8. DESIGN FOR FAILURE (DFF) PRINCIPLE 🔁️
	+ Awareness is the key, and premature optimization is...
	+ As an engineer, know about: Prevention/Avoidance, Identification/Detection, Mitigation/Managment.
	- See mistake in first saw as a deliberate-fault, accidental-fault, or a bug.
	- Scalability should not come to alter critical-functionalities.

9. ALWAYS HAVE PLAN-B FOR EVERYTHING 🅱️
	+ Do not wait for emergencies, prepare for the unexpected.
	+ Not every system has robust mitigations and all use-case scenarios.
	- Make general planning and execution flexible.

10. USE COMMON SENSE, ETHICS, AND MORAL VALUES 🧠️
	+ Textbooks and trainings will not tell you everything
	+ Make your decisions in an ethical and a professional manner.
	+ Exemplify yourself, provide right solutions, accepts mistake as learning, and listen to ethical concerns.


Go [back](../index.md)
